Use reports to remediate findings

**Cloud Security Incident Response and R emediation (Google Cloud Lab)**

In this Google Cloud lab, I served as a Junior Cloud Security Analyst at
Cymbal Bank, with a main goal to **identify, remediate, and confirm the
resolution of security threats and vulnerabilities** in a timely manner.

This involved addressing security concerns highlighted in a report,
particularly an incorrectly configured Cloud Storage bucket holding
sensitive data.

My actions included using **Google Cloud Security Command Center (SCC)**
to find and verify high and medium-risk security threats. I focused on
issues like a misconfigured Cloud Storage bucket.

I then **corrected the bucket\'s configuration** to remove public access
and ensure proper permissions. Finally, I **ran a compliance report to
verify that the remediation was successful**, confirming the issues were
resolved.

Task 1. Identify the vulnerabilities with Security Command Center (SCC)

**Task 1: Identifying Cloud Vulnerabilities and Compliance Status with
Security Command Center:**

My objective in this task was to **assess a Google Cloud project\'s
security posture and identify high and medium-risk vulnerabilities**
that needed remediation. I aimed to understand the compliance status
using Google Cloud\'s security tools.

My actions involved using **Google Cloud Security Command Center
(SCC)**. I navigated to the \"Vulnerabilities\" section to find active
security issues.

I focused on findings for a storage bucket, specifically
**PUBLIC_BUCKET_ACL** (publicly accessible storage) and
**BUCKET_POLICY_ONLY_DISABLED** (uniform bucket-level permissions not
enabled). These were identified as high and medium-risk issues.

Following this, I generated a **CIS Google Cloud Platform Foundation 2.0
compliance report** within SCC, sorting the findings to prioritize those
needing attention.

In the Google Cloud console, from the **Navigation menu** (![Navigation
Menu icon](media/image1.png){width="0.15625in"
height="0.13541666666666666in"}), select **Security** \> **Overview**.
The Security Command Center Overview page opens.

1.  In the **Security Command Center** menu, click **Vulnerabilities**.
    The Vulnerabilities page opens.

![](media/image2.png){width="7.29556539807524in"
height="5.528052274715661in"}

![](media/image3.png){width="7.294426946631671in"
height="2.5160903324584427in"}

There are many active vulnerabilities listed. You can use the filter to
search for the specified findings using the **Module ID**. You will
focus on the following active findings listed for your storage bucket:

- **Public bucket ACL (PUBLIC_BUCKET_ACL)**: This entry indicates that
  there is an Access Control List (ACL) entry for the storage bucket
  that is publicly accessible which means that anyone on the internet
  can read files stored in the bucket. This is a high-risk security
  vulnerability that needs to be prioritized for remediation.

- **Bucket policy only disabled (BUCKET_POLICY_ONLY_DISABLED)**: This
  entry indicates that uniform bucket-level permissions are not enabled
  on a bucket. Uniform bucket-level access provides a way to control who
  can access Cloud Storage buckets and objects, simplifying how you
  grant access to your Cloud Storage resources. This is a medium-risk
  vulnerability that must also be remediated.

- **Bucket logging disabled (BUCKET_LOGGING_DISABLED)**: This entry
  indicates that there is a storage bucket that does not have logging
  enabled. This is a low-risk vulnerability that you are not required to
  remediate in this scenario.

**Next**, run a compliance report that confirms the vulnerability
issues.

3.  In the **Security Command Center** menu, click **Compliance**. The
    Compliance page opens.

![](media/image4.png){width="7.301694006999125in"
height="3.903623140857393in"}

4.  In the **Google Cloud compliance standards** section, click **View
    details** in the **CIS Google Cloud Platform Foundation 2.0** tile.
    The CIS Google Cloud Platform Foundation 2.0 report opens.

5.  Click on the **Findings** column to sort the findings and display
    the active findings at the top of the list.

![](media/image5.png){width="7.228992782152231in"
height="5.85621719160105in"}

Task 2. Remediate the security vulnerabilities

**Task 2 : Remediating Cloud Storage Security Vulnerabilities and
Verifying Resolutions**

My objective in this task was to **remediate the security
vulnerabilities** identified in the previous assessment and then
**confirm their resolution** by checking the updated security status of
the Cloud Storage bucket.

My actions involved navigating to the **Cloud Storage service** in the
Google Cloud console to access the identified bucket.

I addressed the PUBLIC_BUCKET_ACL vulnerability by **removing allUsers
from the Storage Object Viewer role**, which removed public access to
the bucket. To fix the BUCKET_POLICY_ONLY_DISABLED issue, I **enabled
uniform bucket-level access control**, setting a single permission
policy for the bucket and its objects.

After making these changes, I went back to **Security Command Center\'s
Compliance section** and generated an updated **CIS Google Cloud
Platform Foundation 2.0 report**. This step allowed me to **confirm that
the active findings related to public access and bucket policy were
reduced to zero**, verifying the effectiveness of my remediation
efforts.

This task reinforced my skills in **Google Cloud Storage security,
access control management, and the process of verifying security
remediations**. The outcome was the **successful remediation of critical
data exposure risks** and **validated compliance**, showing my ability
to implement security best practices in a cloud environment.

1.  In the Google Cloud console, from the **Navigation
    menu** (![Navigation Menu icon](media/image1.png){width="0.15625in"
    height="0.13541666666666666in"}), select **Cloud
    Storage** \> **Buckets**.

2.  Under the **Filter** section, click the **Name** link of the bucket
    for your project (BUCKET_NAME). The Bucket details page opens.

3.  Click the **Permissions** tab. The **Permissions** section lists all
    the permissions provided for the bucket.

![](media/image6.png){width="6.989067147856518in"
height="4.304959536307962in"}

**First,** remove the public access to the Cloud Storage bucket.

4.  Under the **Permissions** section, click the **View by Roles** tab.

5.  Expand the **Storage Object Viewer** role and select the checkbox
    for **allUsers.**

6.  Click **Remove Access**.

7.  A pop-up will appear asking you to confirm the access removal.
    Ensure **Remove allUsers from the role Storage Object Viewer on this
    resource** is selected and click **Remove**.

![](media/image7.png){width="7.244504593175853in"
height="3.2702077865266843in"}

**Next**, switch the access control to uniform. This will enforce a
single (uniform) set of permissions for the bucket and its objects.

8.  On the **Access control** tile, click **Switch to uniform**.

9.  On the **Edit access control** dialog, select **Uniform**.

10. Click **Save**.

![](media/image8.png){width="6.626291557305337in"
height="4.392994313210848in"}

**Finally**, run a compliance report to confirm that the vulnerability
issues have been remediated.

11. In the Google Cloud console, from the **Navigation
    menu** (![Navigation Menu icon](media/image1.png){width="0.15625in"
    height="0.13541666666666666in"}),
    select **Security** \> **Compliance**.

12. In the **CIS Google Cloud Platform Foundation 2.0** tile, and
    click **View details** to view the report again.

![](media/image9.png){width="6.769456474190727in"
height="3.596568241469816in"}

The number of active findings for the **Cloud Storage buckets should not
be anonymously or publicly accessible** and **Bucket policy only should
be Enabled** rules should now be **0**. This indicates that the **Public
bucket ACL** and **Bucket policy only disabled** vulnerabilities for the
Cloud Storage bucket have been remediated.

Conclusion

Throughout this lab, i gained practical experience in identifying and
prioritizing threats using the Security Command Center. also remediated
the vulnerabilities identified for my project, and generated a report to
confirm that the vulnerabilities have been remediated.

By remediating the vulnerabilities and ensuring the compliance status of
the Cloud Storage bucket, i helped my organization to prevent data
breaches, unauthorized access, and data loss.
