**Custom IAM Role Creation for Granular Access Control (Google Cloud
Lab)**

In this Google Cloud lab, I worked on a key security task for Cymbal
Bank\'s cloud migration: **setting up access control for a sensitive
customer database using custom Identity and Access Management (IAM)
roles**.

My main goal was to allow a third-party audit group to access the
database for their review, while applying the principle of least
privilege.

My actions involved using **Google Cloud IAM** to build a **custom IAM
role** for the audit team. I carefully selected and assigned only the
permissions needed for **viewing and listing database contents**,
avoiding any broader access.

After creating this custom role, I assigned it to the designated audit
user. I then **verified that the custom role was correctly applied** and
that the user\'s permissions matched the requirements, confirming access
control was set up as intended.

**Task 1. Create a custom role**

Applying the principle of least privilege is integral to IAM. It ensures
that users are only given the permissions they need to perform their
tasks. Custom roles provide a way to tailor permissions to an
organization\'s needs, making sure that users do not have broad and
excessive permissions.

In this task, I\'ll create a custom role for the audit team at Cymbal. I
will then grant the custom role restricted access for viewing the
database contents.

1.  In the Google Cloud console, in the **Navigation
    menu** (![Navigation Menu icon](media/image1.png){width="0.15625in"
    height="0.13541666666666666in"}), click **IAM &
    Admin** \> **Roles**. The **Roles** page opens.

2.  On the Explorer bar, located near the top of the **Roles** page,
    click **+ Create Role**.

3.  In the **Create Role** dialog, specify the following settings and
    leave the remaining settings as their defaults:

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Property**   **Value (type or select)**
  -------------- ---------------------------------------------------------
  Title          Audit Team Reviewer

  Description    Custom role, allowing the audit team to conduct its
                 review activities. This role grants read-only access to
                 Firebase database resources.

  ID             CustomRole

  Role launch    General Availability
  stage          
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](media/image2.png){width="6.504364610673666in"
height="4.219414916885389in"}

4.  Click the **+ Add permissions**. The **Add permissions** dialog box
    opens.

5.  In the **Filter permissions by role** field, type **Firebase
    Realtime**.

6.  In the results drop-down field, select the **Firebase Realtime
    Database Viewer** checkbox.

7.  Click **OK**.

8.  Under **Filter**, select
    the **firebase.clients.list** and **firebasedatabase.instances.list** checkboxes
    to add these permissions to the custom role.

![](media/image3.png){width="7.264459755030622in"
height="4.2779604111986in"}

9.  Click **Add**.

10. In the **Create Role** dialog, click **Create**.

The new role should now be created and added to the existing roles in
the project.

**Task 2. Grant a role to a user**

In this task, I\'ll assign the custom role,created in Task 1 to an
existing user.*.*

1.  In the Google Cloud console, in the **Navigation
    menu** (![Navigation Menu icon](media/image1.png){width="0.15625in"
    height="0.13541666666666666in"}), click **IAM & Admin** \> **IAM**.
    The **IAM** page opens.

2.  On the **View By Principals** tab, click **Grant access**.
    The **Grant access** dialog window will open.

The **Grant access** dialogue box is a crucial component of the IAM
system in Google Cloud. It provides you with the ability to precisely
define and manage these permissions for users, groups, and service
accounts.

3.  Copy the **Google Cloud username 2: Username 2** and paste it into
    the **New principals** field.

![The settings of a Google Cloud IAM grant access window displays the
addition of a user to a
project](media/image4.png){width="7.3220089676290465in"
height="3.379903762029746in"}

4.  Expand the **Select a role** drop-down menu, select **Custom**, and
    then select **Audit Team Reviewer**. This is the role you created in
    the previous task.

![The settings of a Google Cloud IAM grant access window displays the
user being granted the Audit Team Reviewer
role.](media/image5.png){width="6.786520122484689in"
height="3.391470909886264in"}

5.  Click **Save**.

The custom role should now be assigned to the user.

![](media/image6.png){width="6.531116579177603in"
height="3.7464402887139108in"}

**Task 3. Verify the role**

So far, you\'ve created a custom role with the appropriate permissions
and granted the role to the user.

Now, you\'ll need to check your work to verify that the user has been
assigned the role you created. Ensuring that you\'ve correctly
configured settings is an integral in part of your workflow as a cloud
security analyst.

In this task, you\'ll use Google Cloud\'s Policy Analyzer to create a
query to check the roles granted to the user.

1.  In the Google Cloud console, in the **Navigation
    menu** (![Navigation Menu icon](media/image1.png){width="0.15625in"
    height="0.13541666666666666in"}), click **IAM & Admin** \> **Policy
    Analyzer**. The **Policy Analyzer** page opens.

2.  In the **Analyze policies** section, on the **Custom Query** tile,
    click **Create custom query**

3.  In the **Set the query parameters** section, expand the **Parameter
    1** drop-down menu and select **Principal**.

4.  Copy the **Google Cloud username 2: Username 2** and paste it into
    the **Principal** field.

![A Google Cloud IAM policy analyzer window displays the settings of a
custom query setting the query parameters for a
user](media/image7.png){width="7.861439195100613in"
height="3.117589676290464in"}

5.  Click **Continue**.

6.  In the **Advanced options for query results** section, select
    the **List resources within resource(s) matching your
    query** checkbox.

7.  Click **Analyze** and then select **Run query** in the drop-down
    menu.

> ![](media/image8.png){width="6.251119860017498in"
> height="4.722576552930883in"}

The results should return the role granted to the user.

**Conclusion**

You have successfully utilized IAM to create a custom role, grant access
to a user for that role, and verified the permissions within Google
Cloud. Cymbal Bank\'s audit team can now begin working on their database
audit using the custom role you created.

IAM defines who has access to which resources based on their role. It is
critical for managing digital identities in an organization\'s
environment and will be integral in your work as a cloud security
analyst.

By using IAM services, you are well on your way to effectively managing
access and permissions to storage resources.
