**Change firewall rules using Terraform and Cloud Shell**

**Automated Network Infrastructure Deplyment with Terraform (Gloogle
Cloud Lab).**

In this Google Cloud lab, I focused on securely provisioning network
infrastructure for Cymbal Bank\'s new banking application using
Infrastructure as Code (IaC). My core objective was to **define and
deploy a Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) network and associated firewall
rules using Terraform**, ensuring a repeatable and consistent deployment
process.

My actions involved activating **Cloud Shell** as my command-line
environment.

I then **cloned a Terraform repository** containing the configuration
files for the network infrastructure. The main part of this task was to
**deploy the VPC network and firewall rules** by executing Terraform
commands.

This approach allowed for automated provisioning, which is key for
maintaining security policies, managing network traffic, and ensuring
consistency as the cloud environment evolves. By using Terraform, I
could also track and manage changes to the firewall rules over time.

## Task 1. Clone the Terraform repo

In this task, I\'ll clone the Terraform example repository using the
Cloud Shell terminal. The Terraform example contains the configuration
file, which you\'ll use to provision the firewall rules.

1.  In the Google Cloud console, click the **Activate Cloud
    Shell** ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/91c81644-9089-40b2-a578-1a56c07d9512)


2.  Click **Continue**.

<!-- -->

3.  Copy the following command into the Cloud Shell terminal:

\###

cloudshell_open \--repo_url
\"https://github.com/terraform-google-modules/docs-examples.git\"
\--print_file \"./motd\" \--dir \"firewall_basic\" \--page \"editor\"
\--tutorial \"./tutorial.md\" \--open_in_editor \"main.tf\"
\--force_new_clone

\###

4.  Press **ENTER**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fca8a079-111b-442b-9866-a511820f48e6)


This command clones the Terraform example directory.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/10e0a819-329a-452d-b626-0656c0d9d8cb)


This command performs the following actions:

- Clones the terraform-google-modules.

- Prints the motd file name.

- Switches to the firewall_basic directory.

- Checks the cloned files, for example tutorial.md.

- Opens main.tf in Cloud Shell Editor.

Once the cloning is complete, you'll be at
the \~/cloudshell_open/docs-examples/firewall_basic location in the
terminal. Your Cloud Shell prompt should display similar output to the
following example:

student_01_c2e095df84e2@cloudshell:\~/cloudshell_open/docs-examples/firewall_basic
(qwiklabs-gcp-04-fde36f013e65)\$

5.  Copy the following command into the Cloud Shell terminal to list the
    contents of the directory:

\###

ls

\###

You should notice that several files in the directory have been
downloaded: backing_file.tf, main.tf, motd, and tutorial.md.

6.  Copy the following command into the Cloud Shell terminal to analyze
    the configuration of the firewall rule:

\###

cat main.tf

\###

7.  Press **ENTER**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6a651d7a-3900-4d6b-aa2b-7a0b099d1407)


The main.tf file is the configuration file that defines the resources
that Terraform will create. Two resources will be created: a firewall
rule google_compute_firewall named test-firewall-\${local.name_suffix} with
rules to allow ICMP and TCP traffic from ports 80, 8080, and 1000-2000
and a VPC
network google_compute_network named test-network-\${local.name_suffix}.
The variable \${local.name_suffix} is a local variable that
automatically generates unique names for resources.

## Task 2. Deploy the VPC network and firewall

In this task, i\'ll deploy a new VPC network and a new firewall rule.
This task provides hands-on experience with building a VPC network and
subnets.

1.  Copy the following command into the Cloud Shell terminal.

\###

export GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT=Project ID

\####

This command sets the project ID.

2.  Press **ENTER**.

3.  Copy the following command into the Cloud Shell terminal:

\###

terraform init

\####

This command initializes the Terraform script.

4.  Press **ENTER**.

The output should return a message stating that the Terraform has been
successfully initialized. Take a moment to examine the output. You\'ll
notice that Terraform will create a new firewall and VPC network:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6e5f86bf-0c7c-42e5-96c1-6b299a9e2b61)


5.  Once the initialization is complete, copy the following command into
    the Cloud Shell terminal:

\###

terraform apply

\####

This command applies the changes and deploys the Terraform script.

6.  Press **ENTER**.

<!-- -->

7.  The command prompt will prompt you to **Enter a value**. Type
    \"yes\", and press **ENTER**.

This will start creating the VPC network and firewall rules.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1d5d03e3-28ed-456f-8099-3638c88fc5c7)


Once it's completed, the output should return the following message:

Apply complete! Resources: 3 added, 0 changed, 0 destroyed.

This means that the VPC and firewall have been successfully deployed.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2e55aaee-e387-4f0f-bff3-0206368942cd)


Task 3. Verify the deployment of the
resources

In this task, i\'ll verify that the newly created VPC and firewall rules
have been successfully deployed.

1.  In the Google Cloud console, from the Navigation menu (![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0017d6ae-f538-42f7-9965-968b00063d43)
, select **VPC network \> VPC
    networks**. The VPC networks page opens.

2.  You should notice two VPC networks, **default** and the newest one
    you just created, **test-network**. Click **test-network** to access
    the VPC network details.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3ae2e369-a4a3-490b-805f-60bf30110166)


3.  Click **Firewalls**. Use the expand arrow to
    expand **vpc-firewall-rules**. Under **Protocols and
    ports** and **Action** you should notice the firewall rules are the
    same rules as defined in the configuration
    file: **Allow** and **tcp:80**, **1000-2000**, **8080 icmp**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/976213ca-8844-4dba-b313-b046d276d3ac)

Conclusion

I\'ve successfully built a VPC network and subnet using Terraform and
the Cloud Shell. This lab provides the foundation to developing advanced
automated solutions that can be given to system administrators to use
with Terraform.

By creating the VPC network and firewall, I have gained a better
understanding of how it enables you to automate the process of
provisioning and modifying firewall rules. This helps establish
consistency across various environments, while also helping reduce the
chance of human error.
