Create symmetric and asymmetric keys

**Implementing Cryptographic Key Management for Data Protection (Google
Cloud Lab)**

In this Google Cloud lab, I addressed a core security challenge for
Cymbal Bank: **protecting large volumes of sensitive customer data
during its transfer from on-premises servers to the cloud**.

My objective was to leverage a cloud key management system to create and
manage both symmetric and asymmetric encryption keys to facilitate
secure data transmission.

My actions involved understanding and applying cryptographic principles.
I began by **creating a symmetric key**, which is efficient for bulk
data encryption, suitable for the high volume of data transfer.

Following this, I proceeded to **create an asymmetric key pair** (public
and private keys). This type of key is important for secure key exchange
and digital signatures, complementing the symmetric key approach for a
balanced and secure communication system, much like how HTTPS works. The
use of asymmetric keys helps solve the key distribution challenge
inherent in symmetric key cryptography.

## Task 1. Create a symmetric key

In this task, I'll delve into the intricate process of crafting a
symmetric key, complete with considerations for its designated region
and the crucial aspect of its protection level. i\'ll begin by
generating a symmetric key with carefully tailored parameters.

1.  In the Google Cloud console, click the **Navigation
    menu** ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/dbf00201-faf3-462d-b9c8-83fe014c7ba8)
.

2.  Select **Security \> Key Management**.

3.  On the **Key Rings** tabbed page, click **+ Create Key Ring**.

**Now**, specify the key details.

4.  For **Key ring name**, enter **demo-key-ring**.

5.  For the **Location type** category, select **Region**.

6.  Expand the **Region** drop-down menu, and select **REGION**.
   
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/12d0fe44-6de6-4c49-b81a-0a51618d5cf1)


8.  Click **Create**.

9.  In the **Name and protection level** category, in the **Key
    name** field, enter **demo-key**.

> The **Protection level** should be set to **Software** by default, if
> not, select it now.

9.  Click **Continue**. The Key material category expands.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/69507671-1063-4b9e-bb51-956a4ffc1d22)


10. For **Key material**, select **Generated key**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9a4fadc2-c0b4-4405-b8a6-0ce7476228e7)


11. Click **Continue**. The Purpose and algorithm category expands.

12. For **Purpose**, select **Symmetric encrypt/decrypt**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/df4ce9c7-b9c7-4bf3-9fdb-6e41daf52ef1)


13. Click **Continue**. The Versions category expands.

14. For **Key rotation period**, select **90 days**.

15. For **Starting on**, leave as the default value.

16. Click **Continue**. No additional settings are needed.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b9babe92-7fc8-43e7-9da6-059ee394c77e)


18. Click **Create**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/20d20155-500f-4a38-8a87-4f76ec2c2135)


Once the key is created, it can be used for a variety of implementations
such as data encryption and decryption.

**Symmetric keys** are commonly used to encrypt sensitive data before
storage or transmission. When data needs to be accessed or shared, the
same symmetric key is used to decrypt the encrypted content, ensuring
that only authorized parties can access the original information.

## Task 2. Create an asymmetric key

In this task, you\'ll create an asymmetric key with specific settings,
including that of its algorithm and protection level.

1.  In the Google Cloud console, click the **Navigation
    menu**
    ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d76d9086-557a-41ca-b1b6-38aa18f68102)


3.  Select **Security \> Key Management**. The Key Rings tabbed page
    opens, listing the newly-created key.

4.  Under **Name**, click the link for the key you created in the
    previous task: **demo-key-ring**. The Key ring details page opens.

5.  In the **Keys** tabbed page, click **+ Create Key**.

Now, specify the key details.

5.  For **Key name**, enter **demo-asymmetric-key**.

6.  For **Protection Level**, select **Software**.

7.  Click **Continue**. The Key material category expands.

8.  For **Key Material**, select **Generated key**.

9.  Click **Continue**. The Purpose and algorithm category expands.

10. For **Purpose**, select **Asymmetric decrypt**.

11. For **Algorithm**, leave as the default value.

12. Click **Continue**.

13. For **Versions**, no settings are required.

14. Click **Continue**. No additional settings are needed.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f4a3501b-bce2-45ba-88cf-77ddc26e25b8)


15. Click **Create**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d4c4ba3c-b7f7-4f73-9cc9-82c6555c1ca3)


The asymmetric key for decryption should now be created.

**Asymmetric keys** can also be used for digital signatures. Digital
signatures help verify the authenticity and integrity of messages,
files, or software, ensuring that they have not been tampered with
during transmission. Digital signatures use two keys, one for signing
which involves the user\'s private key, and one for verifying signatures
which involves the user\'s public key. The output of the signature
process is called the digital signature.

## Conclusion

Through this lab activity, I have gained practical experience in
creating both symmetric and asymmetric keys, which play a crucial role
in ensuring secure data and communication over networks.

Having created both types of keys, you now have a better understanding
of their significance in cryptography. Your newfound ability to create
these keys allows you to assist customers in securely storing large
amounts of data.
