**Determine the difference between normal activity and an incident**

### 

**Investigating and Remediating IAM Threats with Event Threat Detection
(Google Cloud Lab)**

In this Google Cloud lab, I focused on a critical aspect of cloud
security operations: **analyzing and responding to suspicious user
activity detected by Event Threat Detection**. As a Cloud Security
Analyst at Cymbal Bank, my core objective was to investigate two
reported IAM threat findings, differentiate between benign and malicious
activity, and then remediate the confirmed malicious finding.

My actions began by **granting permissions to an external account to
intentionally trigger an Event Threat Detection IAM finding**, which
allowed me to observe the detection process firsthand. I then used
**Security Command Center (SCC)** to access the details of both IAM
findings.

To determine the nature of each alert, I **analyzed the finding details
within SCC and examined related events in Cloud Logging**. This process
helped me understand the differences in log patterns and identify which
finding represented normal user activity versus anomalous, malicious
behavior.

Finally, I took action to **remediate the confirmed malicious IAM
activity by adjusting the relevant IAM settings**, revoking the
unauthorized permissions.

## Task 1. Grant permissions to an external account

In this task, you'll grant project owner rights to an external gmail
account. Granting owner rights to an external account will trigger the
Event Threat Detection IAM detectors. Granting project owner rights to
an external account is considered anomalous behavior or potentially
malicious activity. Event Threat Detection will identify this activity
as a threat and generate findings which you\'ll examine in the upcoming
tasks.

1.  In the Google Cloud console, in the **Navigation
    menu** (![Navigation Menu
    icon](media/image1.png){width="0.16041666666666668in"
    height="0.13194444444444445in"}), click **IAM & Admin** \> **IAM**.
    The **IAM** page opens.

On the **View By Principals** tab, note the two student users that have
been automatically configured for the qwiklabs.net organization. These
two users are also the same users listed in the **Lab details** panel
as **Google Cloud username 1** and **Google Cloud username 2**.

![](media/image2.png){width="7.265708661417323in"
height="4.357090988626422in"}

These two users have automatically been granted owner roles to the lab
project by a service account as part of a normal provisioning process.
This will trigger an alert finding or incident because an external
principal has an owner role. However, because both users belong to the
qwiklabs.net organization this alert is considered normal activity. You
will examine this alert finding later.

2.  On the **View By Principals** tab, click **Grant Access**.
    The **Grant access** dialog displays.

3.  Under the **Add principals** section, in the **New
    principals** field, type **bad.actor.demo@gmail.com**.

4.  Expand the **Select a role** drop-down menu, select **Basic**, and
    then select **Owner**.

5.  Click **Save**.

![](media/image3.png){width="7.248135389326334in"
height="5.523982939632546in"}

You have now assigned the owner role to the external user
bad.actor.demo@gmail.com. This will trigger a finding in SCC because
this user is outside of the qwiklabs.net organization.

![](media/image4.png){width="7.413932633420822in"
height="6.168181321084864in"}

## Task 2. Access the Event Threat Detection findings

In this task, you'll access the Event Threat Detection findings in the
Security Command Center.

1.  In the Google Cloud console, in the **Navigation
    menu** (![Navigation Menu
    icon](media/image1.png){width="0.16041666666666668in"
    height="0.13194444444444445in"}), click **Security \> Findings**.
    The **Findings** page opens.

![](media/image5.png){width="7.182817147856518in"
height="4.044041994750656in"}

You should notice three findings with high severities listed in
the **Finding query results** panel. In this lab, you'll examine
two **Persistence: IAM anomalous grant** findings to determine whether
the finding is normal activity or whether it is malicious.

The **Persistence: IAM anomalous grant** indicates that an anomalous IAM
grant was detected. This means that a user or service account was
granted access to a resource that they should not have had access to.
This could be a potential indication of a malicious actor attempting to
gain unauthorized access to your environment.

**Next**, filter the findings to display a list of **Persistence: IAM
anomalous grant** category findings.

2.  In the **Quick filters** panel, in the **Category** section, select
    the checkbox for the **Persistence: IAM anomalous grant** category.

The filter returns two **Persistence: IAM anomalous grant** findings.

3.  Click the **Event time** column header to sort the findings in
    descending order, so that the earliest finding is at the top.

![](media/image6.png){width="7.295870516185476in"
height="3.768692038495188in"}

## Task 3. Analyze the findings

In this task, you\'ll examine these findings to determine which is
normal activity and which is a genuine incident.

1.  In the **Findings query results** panel, in the **Category** column,
    click the **Persistence: IAM Anomalous Grant** finding with the
    earliest event time. The **Persistence: IAM Anomalous Grant** dialog
    opens on the **Summary** tab, which displays the finding summary.

![](media/image7.png){width="6.830575240594926in"
height="5.695474628171478in"}

2.  Find the **Principal email** row. This is the user account that
    granted the owner role to the user. Notice that the service account
    belongs to the qwiklabs.net organization. With this information, you
    can establish that this finding represents normal and expected
    activity.

![](media/image8.png){width="6.7851246719160105in"
height="5.8759208223972in"}

3.  Click the **Source Properties** tab, and expand **properties \>
    sensitiveRoleGrant \> members**. Again, the email address listed
    for **principalEmail** is the user that granted the owner role, and
    the email address(es) listed for **members** is the user that was
    granted the owner role.

![](media/image9.png){width="6.698780621172354in"
height="5.541746500437445in"}

**Next**, you\'ll locate the malicious activity associated with the
external user account you had granted access to:
bad.actor.demo@gmail.com.

4.  Click the close (**X**) button to return to the **Findings** page.

5.  In the **Findings query results** panel, in the **Category** column,
    click on the **Persistence: IAM Anomalous Grant** findings record
    with the latest event time.

6.  Note the value on the **Principal email** row. This is the user
    account email address that granted the owner role to the user.

![](media/image10.png){width="7.077195975503062in"
height="6.090767716535433in"}

7.  Click **Source Properties** tab, and expand **properties \>
    sensitiveRoleGrant \> members**. You should notice the user
    account <bad.actor.demo@gmail.com>, which is an external user
    account. With this information, you can establish that this finding
    is associated with an unauthorized and malicious actor.

![](media/image11.png){width="7.258459098862642in"
height="5.211706036745407in"}

## Task 4. Access the findings in Cloud Logging

In this task, you'll access the events related to the Security Command
Center findings in Cloud Logging.

1.  In the Google Cloud console, in the **Navigation
    menu** (![Navigation Menu
    icon](media/image1.png){width="0.16041666666666668in"
    height="0.13194444444444445in"}) click **Logging \> Logs Explorer**.
    The **Logs Explorer** page opens. (You may need to click **More
    Products** to expand the **Navigation menu** options and
    locate **Logging** under **Operations**.)

2.  Copy the following query into the **Query** builder at the top of
    the page:

\###

protoPayload.authorizationInfo.permission=\"resourcemanager.projects.setIamPolicy\"

protoPayload.methodName=\"InsertProjectOwnershipInvite\"

\####

This query filters the IAM logs.

3.  Click **Run query**. The query results should display on the **Query
    results** pane.

4.  In the **Query results** pane, expand the audit log listed for your
    project.

5.  Click **Expand nested fields**. All the nested fields contained in
    the log are made visible.

You can now examine the details of the anomalous request event including
information such as:

- **authenticationInfo**: The email of the user who made the request.

- **request**: The email identity of the user the anomalous grant was
  made to.

- **request Metadata**: The IP address of the system where the request
  was made, the browser user agent of the web browser that was used.

This information can be vital when investigating whether an event is
normal activity or an actual threat event.

mxc![](media/image12.png){width="7.12378280839895in"
height="5.521305774278215in"}

![](media/image13.png){width="7.211386701662292in"
height="6.472314085739282in"}

## Task 5. Fix the finding

In this task, you'll remediate the malicious **Persistence: IAM
Anomalous Grant** finding by removing the project owner role that you
had previously assigned to the external user.

1.  In the Google Cloud console, in the **Navigation
    menu** (![Navigation Menu
    icon](media/image1.png){width="0.16041666666666668in"
    height="0.13194444444444445in"}), click **IAM & Admin** \> **IAM**.
    The **IAM** page opens.

2.  Next to the **bad.actor.demo@gmail.com** user, click the **Edit
    principal** (![Edit
    icon](media/image14.png){width="0.16041666666666668in"
    height="0.16041666666666668in"}) icon. The **Edit permissions** page
    opens.

3.  Click the **Delete** (![Delete
    icon](media/image15.png){width="0.16041666666666668in"
    height="0.16041666666666668in"}) icon to delete the owner role.

4.  Click **Save**.

![](media/image4.png){width="7.252354549431321in"
height="2.582205818022747in"}

![](media/image16.png){width="6.101890857392826in"
height="4.898291776027997in"}

The policy will be updated, and the owner role removed from the
bad.actor.demo@gmail.com user.

![](media/image17.png){width="7.1875185914260715in"
height="3.422690288713911in"}

## Conclusion

This lab strengthened my skills in **Google Cloud Security Command
Center (SCC), Event Threat Detection, cloud logging analysis, and IAM
threat remediation**. It provided hands-on experience in distinguishing
between different types of security alerts and taking appropriate
response actions. The outcome was a **clear understanding of the threat
detection lifecycle** and the practical ability to address malicious IAM
activity, improving the overall security posture of user accounts in the
cloud environment.
