### Security Incident Timeline Creation and Executive Communication (Google Cloud Activity)

In this Google Cloud Activity, I focused on a critical aspect of
incident response: **communicating security incidents to non-technical
stakeholders through clear, visual documentation**. As a Cloud Security
Analyst at Cymbal Bank, my core objective was to analyze technical
findings from a severe phishing incident and construct an engaging
visual timeline for executive leadership, aiming to inform and improve
security awareness training.

My actions involved a deep dive into the technical findings of a
high-severity phishing attempt where an employee\'s cloud credentials
were compromised. I **analyzed these findings to understand the sequence
of events, identify affected parties, and pinpoint the exact timing of
the incident**. This required sifting through various pieces of data to
build a complete picture. Based on this analysis, I then **organized the
series of events into chronological order**, forming a structured
narrative of the incident.

Finally, I was responsible for **creating a visual timeline** that
captured these details in an easy-to-understand format, designed for an
executive audience. This timeline would serve as a key component of a
presentation, making complex technical information accessible and
actionable for improving the bank\'s security posture.

**Step 1: Review the alert ticket:**

The Alert ticket and technical findings document contains the technical
details about the phishing incident. Consider the following key details
as you review it:

● The date and time of each event

● The name(s) of the user(s) affected

● The number of events leading up to the incident (user clicking on
email, attacker using credentials, etc).

● The different types of malicious activity that happened after the
incident

![](media/image1.png){width="4.854166666666667in" height="1.53125in"}

Incident: INC-10056

A phishing email was sent to a user and resulted in unauthorized access.

  --------------- --------------------- -------------- ---------------------
  **Incident ID** **Reported**          **Severity**   **Status**

  INC-10056       10/12/2023 12:31PM    High           Closed
  --------------- --------------------- -------------- ---------------------

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Summary**

  **One** user received a phishing email containing a link to a fake page
  prompting the user to reauthenticate using their credentials. The user,
  **Lucas**, clicked the link and posted their credentials into the
  phishing form. The attacker used Lucas\' stolen credentials to
  authenticate into their account and log in to **four** applications.
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  **Timestamp**                       **Event**

  2023-10-12T11:45:00Z                The user receives an email
                                      containing a phishing link.

  2023-10-12T11:46:00Z                The user clicks on the phishing
                                      link.

  2023-10-12T11:47:00Z                The user submits their credentials
                                      into the phishing link form.

  2023-10-12T11:48:00Z                The security team receives an alert
                                      for an unrecognized device login
                                      from an unusual geolocation.

  2023-10-12T11:49:00Z                Suspicious activity is observed in
                                      four applications.
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------

**Step 2: Create a timeline:**

\######\
Aquí va la presentacion poinT

\####
