Recover VMs with Google Backup and DR Service

**Implementing Cloud Disaster Recovery and Business Continuity with
Google Cloud Backup and DR Service (Google Cloud Lab)**

In this Google Cloud lab, I contributed to **business continuity and
disaster recovery efforts** by assisting Cymbal Bank\'s Incident
Response Team with the recovery of affected virtual machines (VMs) after
a security incident. My core objective was to utilize Google Cloud
Backup and DR Service to protect and restore Compute Engine instances,
ensuring quick resumption of critical business operations.

My actions began by **connecting to the Backup and DR management
console**, which is the central interface for managing backup and
recovery operations.

I then **created and validated a backup plan template**, which defines
how data will be backed up and retained.

A key step involved **discovering and adding a Compute Engine instance**
to the Backup and DR management console, enabling its protection.

Finally, to simulate recovery and demonstrate the service\'s
capabilities, I **restored a Compute Engine instance into two different
Google Cloud projects**, proving the ability to recover data to new
locations.

## Task 1. Connect to the Backup and DR console

Before I can begin implementing recovery actions, I\'ll first need to
connect to the Backup and DR console.

1.  In the Google Cloud console, click the **Navigation
    menu** ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a235c516-0271-42e4-b74c-9e9c9cba66f2)
 \> **Backup and DR**. (You will
    have to click **More Products** and then scroll down to
    find **Backup and DR** in the **Operations** section).

2.  From left nevigation pane, click **Management console**

   
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8fc676e9-96af-40f7-8753-634010f7c6e3)


4.  In the **Log in to the management console** section, click **Log in
    to the management console**.

5.  If asked to **Choose an account**, click your **Google Cloud
    Username**: USERNAME.

6.  **Skip** the **Welcome to Google Backup and DR!** tour. The Backup
    and DR management console opens.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0b773dba-fdcb-453b-ac8c-0d8d263c980c)


7.  In the Backup and DR management console titlebar,
    click **Manage** \> **Appliances**.

If the management server and the Backup and Recovery server are
successfully installed, the Connectivity status has a green check.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5f86e042-69eb-4101-993f-e500a1163d92)


## Task 2. Create a backup plan template

In this task, I'll create a backup plan template.

Backup plan templates are composed of backup policies. In policies, you
define when to run a backup, how frequently to run a backup, and how
long to retain the backup image for --- **Days**, **Weeks**, **Months**,
or **Years**.

1.  In the Backup and DR management console titlebar, click **Backup
    Plans** \> **Templates**, and then click **+Create Template**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8bda8781-9269-4367-9597-d25ecc4b5c78)


![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/995b1958-a8e5-440b-97ac-9b032721ba3c)


2.  In the **Template** field, set the template name to **vm-backup**.

<!-- -->

3.  In the **Description** field, type **Virtual Machine Backups**.

4.  In the **Policies** box, next to **Snapshot,** click **+ Add** to
    add a production to snapshot backup policy.

The **Production to Snapshot** dialog opens.

5.  In the **Create/Edit Policy** section, set the following fields and
    leave all other settings at their defaults:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Field                                     Value
  ----------------------------------------- -----------------------------
  **Policy Name**                           Daily VM snapshot

  **Scheduling**                            Continuous

  **Every**                                 2 Hour(s)
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

• **Windowed** defines a discrete snapshot backup schedule adhering to a
specific frequency and time window.\
• **Continuous** defines a continuous snapshot backup Schedule

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/584b2dec-c255-46cc-ba88-4646b3f328ae)


6.  Click **Create Policy**.

7.  Click **Save Template**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3c22280b-46ed-46cf-9fbe-03c09f96a1d5)


8.  Click **Okay** to acknowledge template creation **Success.**

Keep the Backup and DR management console open in a new tab for the
entire lab.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/afa56449-d05f-45f9-bcb2-601c7baf3186)


## Task 3. Validate the backup and recovery appliance service account permissions

In this task, I'll view the required IAM roles of the backup/recovery
appliance to verify that it has the correct IAM roles.

An appliance is a hardware or software device that is designed to
perform a specific task. Security appliances are used to protect
networks from unauthorized access, attacks, and data breaches.

Every appliance has a dedicated service account attached to it---that
was created during appliance deployment in the project where the
appliance was deployed. For appliances installed on version 11.0.2 and
higher, a corresponding cloud credential for this service account is
automatically created at the time of an appliance deployment.

The name of the cloud credential is based on the appliance name followed
by the suffix -sa. For example, if the name of the backup/recovery
appliance is bur-appliance-us-east1, then the name appliances
corresponding cloud credential is bur-appliance-us-east1-sa.

To view and verify the required IAM role:

1.  Return to the Google Cloud console, in the **Navigation
    menu** ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bc76b950-7aab-4f8c-a61e-46dfd6a39a2d)
, click **IAM & Admin** \> **IAM**.

2.  In the **Name** column, find the service account attached to your
    backup appliance, the service account\'s name should be **Service
    account for backup and recovery appliance**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ee1bb2f2-6a18-4ec4-abe5-cbd992a72daa)


3.  In the **Role** column, notice that the **Backup and DR Cloud
    Storage Operator role** is already assigned.

## Task 4. Discover and add Compute Engine instances to the management console

In this task, I'll use the **onboarding wizard** to onboard your
Compute Engine instances. Onboarding an instance means you attach the
template to the instance.

1.  Return to the Backup and DR management console.

2.  From the titlebar, click **Backup and Recover** \> **Back Up**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9dee87c2-f3fb-42b5-8460-2a3f980943dd)


3.  In the **Google Cloud** section, click **Compute Engine**.

4.  Under **Credential**, select **backup**, and click **Next**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/27c76fe4-d68f-4a79-b321-da34fdad1b78)


The **Project ID** and **Zone** drop-down options are populated with
details from the appliance that maps to the **workflow** credential.

5.  Click **Search**.

The results are listed in the search results. You may have to scroll
down to view them:

- **lab-vm**

- **qwiklabs-appliance**

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/972e1e94-9101-4f9e-88a6-4a2ef67de432)


6.  Select the **lab-vm** Compute Engine instance for backup, and then
    click **Next**.

<!-- -->

7.  In the **Enable backups for Compute Engine VM instances** page,
    select the **lab-vm** and then set the following:

    - **Action:** From the drop-down menu, select **Apply a backup
      template**.

    - **Backup template:** From the drop-down menu,
      select **vm-backup**.
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e8059dcc-68ad-4aa4-a6fd-3542dd9b3e77)


![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/49e8b988-c9fe-4d2a-ac49-8518c37d3a09)


7.  Click **OK**.

8.  Click **Next**.

A **Summary of changes** screen appears and provides the following
information:

- Instance Name: lab-vm

- Appliance: qwiklabs-appliance

- Action: Apply a backup template

11. Click **Finish** to complete the onboarding process. This triggers
    the back up of the selected Compute Engine instances based on
    the **Policy Template** you attached.

12. Click **Finish** to confirm your intent to finish.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c99f9382-1b27-4fe6-a7a1-5f4f7ba3a0d0)


After onboarding is complete the **Status** is a green check. This means
the policy template is attached to the selected VM.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a87a08e5-1ab0-4b55-9b8f-a28e43155cd5)


13. In the Backup and DR management console titlebar,
    click **Monitor** \> **Jobs**.

You can monitor the progress of the backup job. When the job is
finished, you have an image that you can restore if needed.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/642381ae-1244-48a0-af5f-36f3e634792f)

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a21fad5c-9f41-4885-b635-b8eaa9e9e53c)


If the jobs list is empty, the backup job has either not started or is
already completed. Use different filter options to populate the jobs
list, for example **Succeeded** or **All** filter options. Filter
results are listed in the **Jobs** list.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e5be75c1-d586-40c7-aa22-e659fd86c864)


## Task 5. Restore a Compute Engine instance

Now that you have an image of your Compute Engine instance, in this
task, you'll create a brand new Compute Engine instance using the backup
image that you created in the previous task.

1.  From the Backup and DR management console titlebar, click **Backup &
    Recover** \> **Recover**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/30c56807-91c2-4433-8ae9-143c93f4143e)


2.  Click the name of the Compute Engine instance you want to recover
    (**lab-vm**) to select it. Click **Next**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2b24618f-0f97-411f-a017-f9f6f407cdb8)


3.  In the action bar, click **Table**. In the **Images** list, one
    image is displayed because there has only been one backup image
    created.

4.  Select the image and click **Mount**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8da7a3a0-74ba-486f-96b0-bee388cce5e7)


5.  Under **Mount**, select **Mount as new GCE instance**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/431fdfdf-1c7d-41e9-8a2b-2fbb1489f051)


6.  Review the configuration options and then update the following:

    - **Region**: Change this to REGION

    - **Zone**: Change this to ZONE

    - **Instance name**: lab-vm-recovered

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/aa57d0ca-a54c-42d9-aa2b-5599b3176b41)


7.  Scroll to the bottom of the page and click **Mount**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cb3e824a-1f96-4a7a-8160-55dac72e4822)


8.  On the **Success** dialog, click **Go to Job Monitor**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ca759b19-d4bc-4681-9420-0a57c7b443ae)


9.  In the filter pane, in the **Status** section, uncheck **Running**.
    Two jobs are displayed, an earlier with a **Succeeded** status, and
    the one you just started with a **Running** status.

When both jobs have a **Succeeded** status, you have the Computer Engine
instance.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/28e28b77-66cf-4c9c-8305-31809f88dddc)


To view the recovered VM, go to the Google Cloud console,
in **Navigation menu**![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b98b7768-941a-4132-91b4-e8939e282251)
, click **Compute Engine** \> **VM
instances** to view three VM instances:

- **lab-vm**

- **lab-vm-recovered**

- **qwiklabs-appliance**

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/51b87ed0-3a78-414a-af68-fb30305ea8ab)




![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e25c5b6c-462e-4742-bb6e-4bcefe5266a6)

## Task 6. Restore a Compute Engine instance to an alternate project

In this task, I'll restore a Computer Engine instance using the back up
template I created, but this time to a different project.

I can also create a brand new Compute Engine instance in a different
project from backup images.

To restore a Compute Engine instance to an alternate project, you first
add the service account of project 1 as a principle to Google Cloud
project 2 and then recover the instance on Google Cloud project 2:

1.  In the Google Cloud console, in the Navigation menu ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/36e57ecf-373b-476b-9f7b-278c11d02b51)
, click **IAM & Admin** \> **IAM**.

2.  In the list of principals, find and copy the email of the **Service
    account for backup and recovery appliance** to use in Step 6. The
    email is similar to the
    following: <qwiklabs-appliances@qwiklabs-gcp-xx-xxxxxxxxx.iam.gserviceaccount.com>.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/70d5caf8-1edf-4603-96e8-c4c9229f1be2)


3.  In the Google Cloud console, click the **Project** selection
    drop-down. If the project lists only one project, click **All** to
    open the **All** tab.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8a5544f7-89de-4186-993e-5344b575b6a0)


![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/23d6f6d6-d404-4f1a-945c-297510c6d6fc)


4.  Search for Google Cloud project ID 2:PROJECT_ID_2 and then click to
    select that project ID. You are now in the **Permissions** page for
    Google Cloud project ID 2:PROJECT_ID_2.

5.  Click **Grant access**.

6.  In the **Add Principles** section, in the **New principals** field,
    paste the email address of the service account of Google Cloud
    project 1, named **Service account for backup and recovery
    appliance**. It should be still in your clipboard.

7.  In the **Assign roles** section:

    - Click **Select a role** and assign the **Backup and
      DR** \> **Backup and DR Compute Engine Operator** role.

    - Click **+Add Another Role**.

    - Click **Select a role** and assign the **Backup and
      DR** \> **Backup and DR Cloud Storage Operator** role.

<!-- -->

8.  Click **Save**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d34f68da-6a34-4639-92bd-9ca5a7fe6203)


![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7babd82e-674a-4264-a2b3-683a7bc5ff7d)


I've added the service account of Google Cloud project 1 as a
principal to Google Cloud project 2. You can now recover the instance on
google Cloud project 2.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/95ddfc92-53c0-493e-aa91-bfa040018f87)


9.  From the Backup and DR management console, navigate to **Backup &
    Recover** \> **Recover**.

10. Select **lab-vm** (the Compute Engine instance you want to recover),
    and click **Next**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/180962cb-ea38-4f31-8b7a-6788786a8c3f)


11. In the action bar, click **Table.**

12. In the **Images** list, select the top image and then
    click **Mount**.

13. Under **Mount**, select **Mount as new GCE instance**.

14. Review the configuration and update the following options:

    - **Project**: Change this to PROJECT_ID_2 to simulate recovering to
      a different project in the Google Cloud.

    - **Instance name**: Notice you can use the same instance name
      because you are in a different Google Cloud project. Update the
      instance name to **lab-vm-project2**.

    - **Region**: Change this to REGION.

    - **Zone**: Change this to ZONE.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/58555bab-4ede-46c2-b98b-c1d4666c8858)


15. Select **Mount** at the bottom of the panel. A **Mount** job starts.
    On the **Success** dialog, click **Go to Job Monitor** to monitor
    the status of this current job. The job may take five minutes or
    longer depending on what region you selected.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/80ac9eac-e597-408f-af86-c36acece3e99)


16. To view the recovered Compute Engine instance in the Google Cloud
    console of Google Cloud project 2, in the **Navigation menu**,
    click **Compute Engine \> VM instances**.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4d808132-daf6-4ead-a9ee-bf77e7f0beaa)


## Conclusion

This lab strengthened my skills in **Google Cloud Backup and DR Service,
disaster recovery planning, data recovery techniques, and Compute Engine
management for business continuity**. It provided hands-on experience in
configuring and executing data protection strategies in a cloud
environment. The outcome was the **successful backup and restoration of
critical VM instances**, directly supporting Cymbal Bank\'s ability to
recover from security incidents and minimize downtime.
