**Create a VPC using Cloud Shell**

**Secure VPC Network Provisioning (Google Cloud Lab)**

In this Google Cloud lab, I helped set up a **secure and isolated
network foundation** for Cymbal Bank\'s move to a hybrid cloud.

As a Junior Cloud Security Analyst, my main goal was to test the
security of their new cloud network by **creating a custom Virtual
Private Cloud (VPC) network and subnets** to extend their on-premises
data center into Google Cloud.

My actions involved using **Cloud Shell** to build a custom VPC network.
I set up **custom subnets** within this VPC, ensuring proper
segmentation and resource placement to align with security practices for
hybrid environments.

After creating the network, I **verified the deployment by viewing the
networks and listing all associated subnets**, confirming the
configuration was accurate. This hands-on provisioning was important for
building a secure test environment for future security assessments.

### **Activate Cloud Shell**

Cloud Shell is an online development and operations environment
accessible anywhere with your browser. Cloud Shell provides command-line
access to your Google Cloud resources.

<<<<<<< HEAD
1.  Click **Activate Cloud Shell**  at the top right of the Google
    Cloud console. You may be asked to click **Continue**.
=======
1.  ClickÂ **Activate Cloud Shell**Â (![Activate Cloud Shell![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/64b1fa06-7cae-4701-ac8d-8fe284e881cf)

    icon](./media/1.2_lab_create_a_vpc_using_cloud_shell_image1.png)) at the top right of the Google
    Cloud console. You may be asked to clickÂ **Continue**.
>>>>>>> fc7fb9678ed7772e1000fb469b68beec764563e9

After Cloud Shell starts up, you\'ll see a message displaying your
Google Cloud Project ID for this session:

Your Cloud Platform project in this session is set to YOUR_PROJECT_ID

The command-line tool for Google Cloud, gcloud,comes pre-installed on
Cloud Shell and supports tab-completion. In order to access Google
Cloud, you\'ll have to first authorize gcloud.

2.  List the active account name with this command:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1f66171f-c8d5-4483-a384-02d19c66cb4e)

## Task 1. Create a network

**Task 1: Creating a Custom VPC Network for Test Environments:**

My objective in this task was to **build the foundational network
infrastructure** for a test environment, essential for evaluating
security functionality and configurations at Cymbal Bank. This involved
setting up a network in Google Cloud using software-defined networking.

My actions focused on creating an **initial custom mode VPC network**. I
chose a custom mode VPC to allow for manual subnet creation, which
offers more control and flexibility for our specific security testing
needs compared to auto-mode VPCs. I used the gcloud compute networks
create labnet \--subnet-mode=custom command in Cloud Shell to provision
this network. This command created a custom mode network named labnet. I
confirmed the successful creation by reviewing the command output, which
displayed the network\'s details.

This task reinforced my understanding of **Google Cloud VPC networking,
network creation commands, and the importance of choosing appropriate
subnet modes** for different architectural requirements. The outcome was
the **successful deployment of a custom VPC network**, providing the
secure and isolated base for further cloud security testing and
proof-of-concept development.

![](media/image4.png){width="6.5625in" height="3.3333333333333335in"}

![](media/image5.png){width="6.166666666666667in"
height="3.4270833333333335in"}

![](media/image6.png){width="7.052674978127734in"
height="4.29202646544182in"}

### Task 2. Create a subnet 

Task 2: Creating a Segmented Subnet within the Custom VPC

In this task, i create a subnet within the newly created custom mode VPC
network. Configuring subnets is a network management best practice. For
test environments, subnets allow Split my VPC into logical segments to
improve the organization of cloud resources, to improve network
performance, and to improve security.

When i create a subnet, its name must be unique in that project for that
region, even across networks. The same name can appear twice in a
project as long as each one is in a different region. Additionally, each
subnet must have a primary IP address range, which must be unique within
the same region in a project.

![](media/image7.png){width="7.214752843394575in"
height="1.8766174540682414in"}

![](media/image8.png){width="7.212615923009624in"
height="3.1841765091863516in"}

Task 3. View networks

In this task i will list the available networks to ensure that you have
successfully created them.

![](media/image9.png){width="6.388857174103237in"
height="1.6895778652668416in"}

![](media/image10.png){width="7.268293963254593in"
height="3.6243985126859144in"}

The default network was created when the project was created.
The labnet** **network** **was created by the gcloud command you ran
earlier.

What is the subnet mode of the labnet network you created?: CUSTOM

Task 4. List subnets

In this task,I will list all subnets within the networks of your
project.

You can either list all subnets in all networks in your project, or you
can show only the subnets for a particular network or region.

Auditing subnets ensures that the network is properly secured, and helps
identify any misconfigurations or potential security vulnerabilities in
your VPCs, such as subnets that might be unintentionally exposed to the
public internet.

![](media/image11.png){width="6.830341207349082in"
height="1.7288156167979003in"}

![](media/image12.png){width="7.188619860017498in"
height="3.0091896325459317in"}Conclusion:

This lab provided valuable hands-on experience in designing and
deploying a custom VPC network and subnet in Google Cloud.

I successfully configured an isolated, secure test environment that
served as the foundational infrastructure for future production
workloads. By building this test VPC with security in mind from the
start, I supported Cymbal Bank's secure transition to a hybrid cloud
model.

Observing the behavior of the network and its subnetworks allowed me to
gather useful data for planning and implementing security controls in
the production environment. This initial setup plays a critical role in
shaping a secure architecture to protect sensitive company data.
