In this capstone project, I worked as a junior cloud security analyst at
Cymbal Retail to respond to a major cloud data breach affecting their
global retail infrastructure.

My primary objective was to support the incident response team in
identifying, containing, and remediating vulnerabilities related to the
breach within the Google Cloud environment.

To begin, I used **Google Cloud Security Command Center** to review and
analyze active security findings.

I identified key misconfigurations and vulnerabilities contributing to
the breach, such as exposed virtual machines, overly permissive firewall
rules, and publicly accessible storage buckets.

Once the root causes were identified, I took immediate action to
mitigate the risks:

- **Isolated the affected compute instance** by shutting down the
  compromised VM.

- **Provisioned a clean replacement** using a trusted snapshot to
  restore service securely.

- **Hardened Cloud Storage access** by revoking public access and
  enabling uniform bucket-level permissions.

- **Restricted network exposure** by limiting firewall port access and
  updating the rules to follow the principle of least privilege.

- **Validated remediation success** by generating a compliance report
  and confirming that the environment no longer exhibited the original
  findings.

Throughout the project, I applied security principles such as least
privilege, defense in depth, and secure configuration management. My
actions contributed directly to the containment of the incident,
restoration of secure services, and improved alignment with regulatory
and compliance standards.

This capstone demonstrated my ability to handle real-world incident
response scenarios using Google Cloud tools, analyze security posture,
implement technical remediations, and verify compliance in a cloud
production environment.

## Task 1. Analyze the data breach and gather information

One morning, the security team detects unusual activity within their
systems. Further investigation into this activity quickly reveals that
the company has suffered a massive security breach across its
applications, networks, systems, and data repositories. Attackers gained
unauthorized access to sensitive customer information, including credit
card data, and personal details. This incident requires immediate
attention and thorough investigation. The first step towards
understanding the scope and impact of this breach is to gather
information and analyze the available data.

In this task, I\'ll examine the vulnerabilities and findings in Google
Cloud Security Command Center to determine how the attackers gained
access to the data, and which remediation steps to take.

*.*

**First**, navigate to the Security Command Center to view an overview
of the active vulnerabilities.

1.  In the Google Cloud console, in the **Navigation
    menu**![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6770351b-a5f0-4b3e-b67d-6b5fc64066cd)
 click **Security \> Risk
    Overview**. The Security Command Center Overview page opens.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0ea5be45-55eb-465e-99c9-268faed0c032)


2.  Scroll down to **Active vulnerabilities**. This provides an overview
    of current security vulnerabilities or issues that need attention
    within the Google Cloud environment.
    
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/54e419e7-69d1-4279-938f-925828dd24e6)


3.  Select the **Findings By Resource Type** tab. The security findings
    or vulnerabilities based on the type of cloud resource affected
    (e.g., instances, buckets, databases) are organized. By reviewing
    active vulnerabilities and findings by resource type, you can
    prioritize and address security issues effectively.

    
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7412a8d6-32ad-46f5-96b1-b412a6e9a114)


You\'ll note that there are both high and medium severity findings
relating to the **Cloud Storage bucket**, the **Compute Instance virtual
machine**, and the **firewall**.

**Next**, navigate to the PCI DSS report.

4.  In the **Security Command Center** menu, click **Compliance**. The
    Compliance page opens.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cc802b33-becf-43f7-83ce-f2e58bba095c)


![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/808de10b-809b-41cc-8e8d-da945ebd6e13)


5.  In the **Google Cloud compliance standards** section, click **View
    details** in the **PCI DSS 3.2.1** tile. The PCI DSS 3.2.1 report
    opens.

6.  Click on the **Findings** column to sort the findings and display
    the active findings at the top of the list.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6627d4ac-1fa0-4bc8-a550-30e3f1c56031)


The Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) is a set of
security requirements that organizations must follow to protect
sensitive cardholder data. As a retail company that accepts and
processes credit card payments, Cymbal Retail must also ensure
compliance with the PCI DSS requirements, to protect cardholder data.

As you examine the PCI DSS 3.2.1 report, notice that it lists the rules
that are non-compliant, which relate to the data breach:

- **Firewall rule logging should be enabled so you can audit network
  access**: This medium severity finding indicates that firewall rule
  logging is disabled, meaning that there is no record of which firewall
  rules are being applied and what traffic is being allowed or denied.
  This is a security risk as it makes it difficult to track and
  investigate suspicious activity.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fd06012d-c8a6-4efe-aef9-3c92d0d015ff)


- **Firewall rules should not allow connections from all IP addresses on
  TCP or UDP port 3389**: This high severity finding indicates that the
  firewall is configured to allow Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) traffic
  for all instances in the network from the whole internet. This is a
  security risk as it allows anyone on the internet to connect to the
  RDP port on any instance in the network.

- **Firewall rules should not allow connections from all IP addresses on
  TCP or SCTP port 22**: This high severity finding indicates that the
  firewall is configured to allow Secure Shell (SSH) traffic to all
  instances in the network from the whole internet. SSH is a protocol
  that allows secure remote access to a computer. If an attacker can
  gain access to a machine through SSH, they could potentially steal
  data, install malware, or disrupt operations.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7a6b2302-847c-42e5-b5a8-4a4ccd68c742)


- **VMs should not be assigned public IP addresses**: This high severity
  finding indicates that a particular IP address is actively exposed to
  the public internet and is potentially accessible to unauthorized
  individuals. This finding is considered a potential security risk
  because it could allow attackers to scan for vulnerabilities or launch
  attacks on the associated resource.

- **Cloud Storage buckets should not be anonymously or publicly
  accessible**: This high severity finding indicates that there is an
  Access Control List (ACL) entry for the storage bucket that is
  publicly accessible which means that anyone on the internet can read
  files stored in the bucket. This is a high-risk security vulnerability
  that needs to be prioritized for remediation.

- **Instances should not be configured to use the default service
  account with full access to all Cloud APIs**: This medium severity
  finding indicates that a particular identity or service account has
  been granted full access to all Google Cloud APIs. This finding is
  considered a significant security risk because it grants the identity
  or service account the ability to perform any action within the Google
  Cloud environment, including accessing sensitive data, modifying
  configurations, and deleting resources.

Since you\'re focusing on identifying and remediating the issues related
to the security incident, please disregard the following findings as
they do not relate to the remediation tasks you're completing:

- **VPC Flow logs should be Enabled for every subnet VPC Network**:
  There are a number of low severity findings for Flow Logs disabled.
  This indicates that Flow Logs are not enabled for a number of
  subnetworks in the Google Cloud project used for this lab. This is a
  potential security risk because Flow Logs provide valuable insights
  into network traffic patterns, which can help identify suspicious
  activity and investigate security incidents.

***Note:** Enabling logging for cloud resources is important in
maintaining observability. However, you will not remediate this finding
in this lab activity as the subnetworks are part of this lab
environment. As a result, this finding will still be visible on the
report after you have completed the remediation tasks.*

- **Basic roles (Owner, Writer, Reader) are too permissive and should
  not be used**: This medium severity finding indicates that primitive
  roles are being used within the Google Cloud environment. This is a
  potential security risk because primitive roles grant broad access to
  a wide range of resources.

- **An egress deny rule should be set**: This low severity finding
  indicates that no egress deny rule is defined for the monitored
  firewall. This finding raises potential security concerns because it
  suggests that outbound traffic is not restricted, potentially exposing
  sensitive data or allowing unauthorized communication.

The following table pairs the rules listed in the report with their
corresponding findings category. This will assist you when examining the
findings according to resource type later:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Findings        **Rule**
  category**        
  ----------------- -----------------------------------------------------
  Firewall rule     Firewall rule logging should be enabled so you can
  logging disabled  audit network access

  Open RDP port     Firewall rules should not allow connections from all
                    IP addresses on TCP or UDP port 3389

  Open SSH port     Firewall rules should not allow connections from all
                    IP addresses on TCP or SCTP port 22

  Public IP address VMs should not be assigned public IP addresses

  Public bucket ACL Cloud Storage buckets should not be anonymously or
                    publicly accessible

  Full API access   Instances should not be configured to use the default
                    service account with full access to all Cloud APIs

  Flow logs         VPC Flow logs should be Enabled for every subnet VPC
  disabled          Network

  Primitive roles   Basic roles (Owner, Writer, Reader) are too
  used              permissive and should not be used

  Egress deny rule  An egress deny rule should be set
  not set           
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Overall, these findings indicate a critical lack of security controls
and non-compliance with essential PCI DSS requirements; they also point
to the vulnerabilities associated with the data breach.

**Next**, navigate to the Security Command Center, and filter the
findings for further examination and analysis of the vulnerabilities in
the Google Cloud environment.

7.  In the Google Cloud console, in the **Navigation
    menu**![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d77426be-5b6f-4db4-b8bf-49cef2514d5a)
, click **Security \> Findings**.
    The **Findings** page opens.

8.  In the **Quick filters** panel, in the **Resource Type** section,
    select the checkbox for the **Google Cloud storage bucket** resource
    type.
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7e4e88c1-7ac6-4b63-9c16-ffc91b1e499a)


The following active findings pertaining to the storage bucket should be
listed:

- **Public bucket ACL**: This finding is listed in the PCI DSS report,
  and indicates that anyone with access to the internet can read the
  data stored in the bucket.

- **Bucket policy only disabled**: This indicates that there is no
  explicit bucket policy in place to control who can access the data in
  the bucket.

- **Bucket logging disabled**: This indicates that there is no logging
  enabled for the bucket, so it will be difficult to track who is
  accessing the data.

These findings indicate that the bucket is configured with a combination
of security settings that could expose the data to unauthorized access.
You\'ll need to remediate these findings by removing the public access
control list, disabling public bucket access, and enabling the uniform
bucket level access policy.

***Note:** Enabling logging for cloud resources is important in
maintaining observability. However, you will not remediate the Bucket
logging disabled finding in this lab activity as this would require
working with multiple projects. As a result, this finding will still be
visible after you have completed the remediation tasks.*

9.  In the **Quick filters** panel, in the **Resource Type** section,
    uncheck **Google Cloud storage bucket,** andselect the checkbox for
    the **Google compute instance** resource type.

The following active findings that pertain to the virtual machine
named **cc-app-01** should be listed:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5518ea3c-d913-4773-b094-5c3eaa005d8e)


- **Malware bad domain**: This finding indicates that a domain known to
  be associated with malware was accessed from the
  google.compute.instance named cc-app-01. Although this finding is
  considered to be of low severity, it indicates that malicious activity
  has occurred on the virtual machine instance and that it has been
  compromised.

- **Compute secure boot disabled**: This medium severity finding
  indicates that secure boot is disabled for the virtual machine. This
  is a security risk as it allows the virtual machine to boot with
  unauthorized code, which could be used to compromise the system.

- **Default service account used**: This medium severity finding
  indicates that the virtual machine is using the default service
  account. This is a security risk as the default service account has a
  high level of access and could be compromised if an attacker gains
  access to the project.

- **Public IP address**: This high severity finding is listed in the PCI
  DSS report and indicates that the virtual machine has a public IP
  address. This is a security risk as it allows anyone on the internet
  to connect to the virtual machine directly.

- **Full API access**: This medium severity finding is listed in the PCI
  DSS report, and indicates that the virtual machine has been granted
  full access to all Google Cloud APIs.

These findings indicate the virtual machine was configured in a way that
left it very vulnerable to the attack.

To remediate these findings I\'ll shut the original VM (cc-app-01) down,
and create a VM (cc-app-02) using a clean snapshot of the disk. The new
VM will have the following settings in place:

- No compute service account

- Firewall rule tag for a new rule for controlled SSH access

- Secure boot enabled

- Public IP address set to None

10. In the **Time range** field, expand the drop-down, and select **Last
    30 days**. This will ensure the list includes findings for the last
    30 days.

11. In the **Quick filters** panel, in the **Resource Type** section,
    uncheck **Google compute instance**, and select the checkbox for
    the **Google compute firewall** resource type.

The following active findings should be listed that pertain to the
firewall:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/02c191e0-d4da-4be5-a3df-88cf3e41df7f)


- **Open SSH port**: This high severity finding indicates that the
  firewall is configured to allow Secure Shell (SSH) traffic to all
  instances in the network from the whole internet.

- **Open RDP port**: This high severity finding indicates that the
  firewall is configured to allow Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) traffic
  to all instances in the network from the whole internet.

- **Firewall rule logging disabled**: This medium severity finding
  indicates that firewall rule logging is disabled. This means that
  there is no record of which firewall rules are being applied and what
  traffic is being allowed or denied.

These findings are all listed in the PCI DSS report and highlight a
significant security gap in the network\'s configuration.

The lack of restricted access to RDP and SSH ports, coupled with
disabled firewall rule logging, makes the network highly vulnerable to
unauthorized access attempts and potential data breaches. You\'ll need
to remediate these by removing the existing firewall overly broad rules,
and replacing them with a firewall rule that allows SSH access only from
the addresses that are used by Google Cloud\'s IAP SSH service.

Now that I have analyzed the security vulnerabilities, it's time to
work on remediating the report findings.
