## Task 6. Verify compliance

After diligently addressing the vulnerabilities identified in the PCI
DSS 3.2.1 report, it\'s crucial to verify the effectiveness of your
remediation efforts. In this task, you\'ll run the report again to
ensure that the previously identified vulnerabilities have been
successfully mitigated and no longer pose a security risk to the
environment.

1.  In the **Security Command Center** menu, click **Compliance**. The
    Compliance page opens.

2.  In the **Google Cloud compliance standards** section, click **View
    details** in the **PCI DSS 3.2.1** tile. The PCI DSS 3.2.1 report
    opens.

3.  Click on the **Findings** column to sort the findings and display
    the active findings at the top of the list.

All major vulnerabilities are now resolved

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4192543a-2286-47be-9483-8c6d816f6f57)


![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a38551e9-40cc-4752-9000-e6bb76c72610)


***Note:** While you addressed the high and medium severity
vulnerabilities, the flow logs remain disabled for a number of
subnetworks. This finding will still be visible on the report after you
have completed the remediation tasks, as this relates to this lab
environment.*

## Conclusion

I have helped the security team at Cymbal Bank to mitigate the impact of
the data breach, address the identified vulnerabilities, and
significantly enhanced the security posture of Cymbal Bank's Google
Cloud environment.

First, I examined and analyzed the vulnerabilities and findings in
Google Cloud Security Command Centre.

Next, I shut the old VM down and created a new VM from a snapshot taken
before the malware infection.

Then, I fixed the cloud storage permissions by revoking public access to
the storage bucket and switching to uniform bucket-level access control.
also removed all user permissions from the storage bucket.

Next, I fixed the firewall rules by deleting the default-allow-icmp,
default-allow-rdp, and default-allow-ssh firewall rules, and enabling
logging for the remaining firewall rules.

Finally, I run a compliance report to confirm that the vulnerability
issues have been remediated.

Remember, as a security analyst it is crucial to maintain regular
security audits and implement ongoing monitoring practices for continued
protection against evolving threats and vulnerabilities.
